---
title: "The Triumvirate of Aberrations"
date: 2018-12-14T13:35:11-08:00
tags: ["writing"]
---

While attending college, for a variety of reasons too tedious to go into, I
frequently dined at my college's dining hall. I dined there on and off for all 4
years, and got to know its quirks: most usefully, what they could cook, and what
they couldn't but still attempted. However, I also learned some of the _lore_ of
the place, like the tale of **The Triumvirate of Aberrations**.

I know these artifacts exist, for I have witnessed them personally. Their powers
and significance are more nebulous, however.

# The Clear Glass

The glasses at this dining hall were all translucent, sort of brown. They tinged
whatever was in them brown, and had the typical internal "posts" embedded in their
sides so that they could be stacked without sticking them together too
violently. There was one glass, however, which had the same mold as the other
glasses, _but was clear_. It permitted the user to observe their drink
unhindered, and one _could_ use this power to more precisely mix their drink,
combining soda and fruit juice (and sometimes alcohol) together, or creating
root beer floats from exotic and not exactly vanilla ice cream.

Although I speak of 1 clear glass, I suspect there were several. Many people had
tales of finding a clear glass, and because it was not particularly spectacular
or noteworthy, it was the least auspicious and most easily dismissed of the
aberrations.

# The Large Spoon

The Large Spoon was a spoon that, although nestled in the spoon place with
dozens of other identical spoons, was nonetheless much larger than the other
spoons. Against the backdrop of mediocrity and smallness, the Large Spoon stood
tall and blatant. It was honestly not particularly useful, as it was likely a
serving spoon, and too large to effectively stick in one's mouth, but the real
question in our minds was how it persisted. It was so standoutish, so brazen,
how did the workers of the dining hall not notice, and remove it? And if they
did (for we did not always find the Large Spoon, and sometimes months went
between sightings), how did it keep getting back into the spoon place among its
obvious not-peers? Is this what it wanted, to be the first among many, the
undeniable superior, the big fish in the small pond? We cannot say, for the
Large Spoon does not speak. To us at least.

# The Heavy Plate

Where the Large Spoon was impudent and garish, the Heavy Plate was subtle. The
plates at the dining hall were not as regular as the spoons: there were enough
varieties that we didn't bother distinguishing them, let alone classifying them.
Their variance was narrow. They might deviate slightly in radius, and might
deviate slightly in color, but they were all smallish ceramic grey plates that
curved up in the typical fashion, sat on the table in the typical fashion, and
held food as we ate it in the typical fashion. Despite our somewhat rough
treatment, they were never seen to marred, only breaking when dropped. But from
the ranks of the grey plate masses, comes the **Heavy Plate**. Unremarkable in
all other aspects, the Heavy Plate weighed almost 3 times more than any other
plate. It was noticeably much more weighty and powerful than the pitiful plates
that occupied the stacks. The Heavy Plate could not be found visually: it sat
inconspicuously in the stacks of inferior plates. All quests to find the Heavy
Plate inevitably failed. It was only upon picking up an otherwise perfectly
normal plate for your meal that you suddenly realize: _you are in the presence
of greatness_. The Heavy Plate has graced your presence. It happened to me only
once, but it was the most memorable meal I ever ate in that place, and I will
carry it with me till my death.

The memory, of course, not the plate. After my meal, I submitted the plate,
temporarily dirtied by whatever slop I was blessed to put upon it, to the great
hall's dish washers. Whether they knew the presence among them or not, they did
not show it. I never saw the Heavy Plate, nor felt its presence, again.
