---
title: "I hate Go, and I think it's really cool"
date: 2018-08-01T14:02:48-07:00
---

My first impression of Go was, ironically, "kinda generic". It's an imperative
language from Google inspired by Python (a little generic) and Java (reigning
king of generic languages,) so some amount of "recognition" is due. Go wears its
influences proudly on its sleeve, which is a little weird, because it's not a
particularly noteworthy heritage.

The interesting thing (to me at least), is that this is all _on purpose_.
_Boring on purpose_ is an engineering feature, because excessively complicated
languages are harder to work on, and produce harder to maintain code. They are
more expressive: it's more efficient for writing code, but maintaining intricate
code can be challenging even with sufficient comments. Go is designed to be a
slightly boring language that just gets the job done.

## "Anecdata"

Allow me to throw a quick case study at you. I was tasked with writing a link
checker: this program would run periodically against the company's website,
parse the HTML for links of all sorts, and then make sure those links return
200 or 30* (I also had to interpret redirect loops as 404s; I gave them 10
redirects before calling their bluff). A relatively simple task with nothing
particularly exceptional. Additionally, because the task is IO bound, this
seemed like a great opportunity to make use of Go's lightweight threading
runtime environment.

The input of the program was a list of URLs to check, and the output was a
report of all the links on those pages, and whether they worked. So I needed
workers to download the URLs, but a separate pool of workers to check the links.
I figured using Go's channels to distribute these links to workers was a good
idea, so this is what my pipeline looked like:

    urls -> [downloader/parser] -> links -> [link check] -> link:bool pairs -> report

The bracketed terms are fan-out workers in separate goroutines. Channels
distributed work, and the `[downloader/parser]` emitted links directly into the
links channel for `[link check]` workers to pick up and check. This had the main
benefit of allowing link checks to happen while more and more links were being
added to the queue. Worker startup and teardown was managed by waitgroups,
because there is such a thing as too many channels.

So I had a little extra time to implement the project, and I was looking at the
code that set up this pipeline, and noticed a lot of boilerplate. I had
non-concurrent url "generation" (feeding an array into a channel), and
non-concurrent report generation (for simplicity: I have no idea if you can just
feed channels into the go templating engine.) But 2 different concurrent
channel-worker-output setups that were very similar. In fact, one of the bugs I
encountered was that the boilerplate for setting those up was wrong in one of
those, so the workers weren't getting fed correctly, or wouldn't shutdown
properly.

I'm no fan of boilerplate, especially boilerplate you can mess up, so I figured
I'd extract the boilerplate into a language construct: a struct with methods, or
something. Something like concurrent map operation over a channel, with the
option of producing multiple values for each input. And I immediately hit a
wall: although there were strong similarities between the setup and shutdown
code for the two types of workers, they operated on different _types_. Go
doesn't have generics. The only way I can express a multi-output concurrent map
in this way is with channels of `interface{}`, then requiring the mapping
function to manually type-cast each item, breaking the nice compile time type
checks that Go has, and opening the system up to nasty runtime panics.

## What?

I was immediately struck. I've run into languages that weren't quite as
expressive as I hoped, but this felt extreme. This was an incredibly simple
project, the abstraction I was trying to write was quite simple, and Go couldn't
even do that. I had error prone boilerplate I wanted to get rid of, and I
couldn't! I had to choose between boilerplate and runtime type errors! I was
floored.

I hate go. I have yet to use a language so lacking in expressiveness. The link
checker was practically a toy, and that was too much! Maybe I've sent too much
time in more expressive languages, but I just can't imagine writing large scale
software with so little access to any kind of abstraction at all.

Ultimately, I still find Go pretty compelling, and its benefits for large scale
software engineering management and maintenance are pretty interesting, but it's
just not the language for me: I hate it too much.
