---
title: "A Hybrid Course"
date: 2018-07-29T20:05:19-07:00
tags: ["writing"]
---

I took a lot of interesting courses in college, but I wanted to talk about a
particular course that you might call a "hybrid course". This particular course
was outside my major: I was required to take non-CS courses to get my degree,
but by senior year, I had also run out of CS courses to take; what is a man to
do? Take a course on Ovid and Medieval Literature.

The details are particular: it was, broadly speaking, a course about 2 things.
Ovid was, of course, a popular and well known romantic writer. The past is a
foreign place, so some of his is somewhat difficult to grasp in a modern
context, but at least half of the course was about understanding Ovid:
understanding his context, his language, his history, and position. One
interesting facet of his legacy is his substantial impact on medieval romantic
literature. The past remains a foreign place, although these works are somewhat
easier to understand, some of them less so. The medieval writers read Ovid
avidly. They referenced his stories, his lines of poetry, his words, his
context, everything.

But the process of teaching this complex, intricate, and interesting subject to
undergrads is... difficult. A fraught process. I think. It should be; this
course takes two very different, very separate, but very interconnected topics
about love, and not just love but about romantic love, physical love, and the
intersection of the two; very mature topics being taught to basically teenagers.
I am not a teacher: perhaps this task is easier than it looks. But it looks like
a fundamentally very difficult problem.

So, tough course, tough subject, on 2 disparate topics. Part of the solution to
this problem involves just having very skilled professor(s). This course was
taught by 2 professors, one a Professor of Classics, the other a Professor of
English. They split the class in twain, and got an extra room allocated. For the
first half of the semester they would teach their specialty to half the class,
and at the midpoint, they switched, teaching the other part of the class about
their specialty. They would also join the classes together on occasion for a
joint lecture to help the class deal with the dense interconnection in the
subject.

From a resource perspective, it was akin to two professors teaching two
different courses, but because the professors collaborated so closely, and the
courses were the same and cross-listed, the actual course managed to approach a
complex interconnected _interdisciplinary_ subject effectively while granting
major degree credit to both Classics and Comparative English. This is a small
but key detail that meant it was more likely for students from both majors to
take a course they wouldn't normally take and be exposed to subjects they
wouldn't normally be exposed to.

I absolutely loved this course, and if you get the opportunity to take [ENGL
209 - Ovid in the Middle Ages][class] from [Jennifer Bryan][bryan] and [Kirk
Ormand][ormand], I highly recommend it.





[class]: http://catalog.oberlin.edu/preview_course_nopop.php?catoid=36&coid=85840
[bryan]: https://www.oberlin.edu/jennifer-bryan
[ormand]: https://www.oberlin.edu/kirk-ormand
