+++
title = "Org Setup"
date = 2021-09-15T21:40:00+02:00
draft = false
tags = ["writing"]
projects = []
+++

Emacs and Org posts are a dime a dozen on the internet, and they're usually
extremely specific, going into precise detail on how the author uses every tool
in Org's arsenal. I usually find these blog posts overwhelming and not
particularly useful. Maybe I'll pick up some tricks and integrate them into my
own setup, but usually my eyes glaze over and I leave none the wiser.

So rather than explain my system in detail, I'll just list some tricks you might
find useful for your own setup.

# What didn't work for me

It took me a while to really get into Org mainly because of sync. I had a fair
number of computers I needed to edit my Org files own (including my phone), so I
needed to make sure they were always available on all the computers. My first
solution was Dropbox, which sounded perfect on paper. I would simply edit the
org files and Dropbox would sync them to the cloud and then my other devices.
There was even an Android app, Orgzly, that could edit Org files and sync them
with Dropbox: perfect.

Except not perfect. I immediately ran into sync issues. Files would become
desynced with 2 clients having different sets of changes. Dropbox would resolve
the issue by copying the file and adding `(Conflicted version...)` to the end.
Without automatic merging, I had to diff the files, see which lines were missing
from where, and manually and painstakingly merge them. Org files are actually
very difficult to edit as text files. If they're longer than like 50 lines, you
absolutely need code folding for them (headers and property drawers, for
example), but diffs were always plaintext un-folded, so you didn't really have
enough context to properly merge. This went triple for Orgzly, which clobbered
my main Org file at least once. I relegated Orgzly to editing its own file
where it couldn't cause too much damage, but multiple isolated Org files was not
really want I was after.

I also found Orgzly to be pretty clunky. I could never figure out how
to capture a quick note from my phone with Orgzly, and the settings were dense
and difficult to understand. Org setups tend to be very custom, leaving
non-Emacs Org editors with real usability issues as they try and judge how much
of Org they should support, and how to handle configuration. And everyone uses
Org differently, so there's a high chance that whatever subset they do implement
is not the subset that you use.

# Git

I directly identified that the issue with the Dropbox solution was merging, but
it took me a while to think up a setup that would be simple enough for me to
use on a daily basis. Because merging was my issue, tracking changes to my Org
file with git was an obvious choice, but git's ergonomics are heavily biased
towards multi-user source control, not single user sync. I didn't want to think
of a commit message for all my arbitrary changes. I eventually "invented" the
`auto-commit` script:

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# Add any changed files
git add -u
# All all new files from directories where I always want new files
git add roam .attach
git commit -m "Automatic commit at `date`"
git push
```

And it's associated Emacs function:

```elisp
(defun auto-commit ()
  (interactive)
  (shell-command "cd $(git rev-parse --show-toplevel) && ./auto-commit"))
```

I didn't add this to any Emacs hooks, I just call it with `M-x` whenever I want
to sync my changes. This unconditionally commits local changes before pushing to
a remote repository. If this repo didn't have the most up to date changes, you
don't have to worry about the remote changes clobbering local ones because they
are already commited, and then you can deal with the merge using git's full
merge system and Magit's UI, which makes things much easier.[^2] I ended up placing
these repositories outside of Dropbox because they are intended to be logically
separate and Dropbox would only get in the way.

# Capturing from my phone

So our Org files are now in a git repo and all changes are tracked. So accessing
Org from my phone got much harder, right? It's going to take a terminal emulator
and git and all sorts of stuff to get this working, right?

Well, Orgzly can still sync with Dropbox. That didn't work when it was syncing
with several other computers, but what if it was the only client writing to
Dropbox? Orgzly would write changes to Dropbox, Dropbox would sync them to a
real computer, and that computer could read the changes and push them to the Git
repo. Because all changes flowed from Orgzly, it wouldn't really need to sync,
right?

In practice, this did not work very well. Although this made sync easier to deal
with and more structured, sync still had to happen. I would capture things with
Orgzly, and commit them, but then I'd have to sync with git. So changes would
still have to flow the other way. Orgzly had to care about whether any captured
entries had been deleted because git cared, and while syncing was less
nightmarish, it was not the effortless sync I was looking for.

So I gave up on phone capturing for a time while I tried to think of a way to
organize the system. Everything I was capturing on the phone was meant to be
processed later, either with more time, a better browser, or a different
mindset. The phone never had to consume any entries, just produce them. It also
didn't have to happen immediately: I could commit the phone entries to the repo
at my leisure, and I could use a full computer to do it with.

So I eventually settled on writing entries from my phone into a chat application
(Discord in this case, but you could use any) and then collecting them later.
The chat didn't have to persist message forever, just long enough for me not to
forget them.

However, I wanted to be able to capture messages into my Org file and then
delete them later when I was finished with them. Being able to delete the chat messages
would also be useful. So, I couldn't rely on matching messages to individual Org
headlines by ID because neither the message nor the Org headline were guaranteed to
exist later. So I needed some kind of external persistent state[^3] to track which
messages had been processed into Org and which hadn't. A hosted database was
right out: I wanted to be able to run this from wherever I was and not bother
with network authentication. Tracking the state with git was the best option,
because then the output and the state would be tracked side by side. I
decided to store the state in the properties of a headline Org file itself
rather than a JSON file or SQLITE database for ease of administration.

So I eventually settled on the structure of a program that would read message
state from an Org file, query messages from the chat app's API, and then write
new messages to the Org file. This design took me quite a while to settle on,
but it was straightforward to implement. I picked Rust because my last cursed
sync program[^1] was in Go and became unmaintainable after 3 rounds of revisions,
and because Rust had a good Org parser and a good Discord client. It was also
extremely fast. This didn't matter initially, but the program scans the entirety
of the file looking for "configs" to get messages from, and the file has gotten
quite long.

I spent the bulk of my time writing the translator for turning Discord message
embeds into Org tasks. I got very tired of all my Twitter links being entirely
opaque, and the Discord embeds have at least their text. I called the program
`link_dump` because it dumps links into my Org files.

I have the program and tokens set up in their own copy of the repo. This lets me
start by pulling the latest changes, running the program to dump links, then
running `auto-commit` to push the changes: guaranteed zero merge issues.

This program is not open source because it's so specific to my needs, but if
there's a demand, I can think about open source it.

The pattern of requesting data and automatically rendering it into Org files
while triggering the processing manually makes the process really easy to
control and understand. This pattern can also be applied to a number of other
tools. You could get RSS feeds, Twitter accounts, and Youtube subscriptions
dumped directly into your Org file for efficient reading. Many chat apps,
including Discord, also support webhooks, so you could use an automation
platform like Zapier or IFTTT to get many platforms for the implementation of
one. I mostly use it for notes to myself.

[^1]:
    This was an attempt to sync tasks in Org mode with tasks in Asana with PRs
    in Github. I needed to sync whether the task was done and the PR merged, and
    also if the Asana task had certain fields set correctly, and that the Asana
    task had the Github PR number, and that the Github PR linked to the Asana
    task. I used the Org file as the source of truth, but I didn't want the
    program to make mutating API calls in case it broke, so it just collected
    info and then reported data mismatches. I wrote the program in Go, and after
    a couple of revisions, the code was unmaintainably complicated. I had
    trouble expressing program state using Go's type system, and found error
    handling inelegant. Luckily processes changed and I could retire the
    program before any of my coworkers asked me for a copy.

[^2]:
    I will note that I sometimes don't notice that I need to merge, and
    although the local changes are commited, they haven't been pushed. I've
    considered writing a script to push to a branch in those cases (letting
    merging be done on any computer), but the script sounds complicated and you
    have to remember to merge the branch, so then you need some kind of alert or
    UI, and it gets complicated fast.

[^3]:
    This state was just a handfull of values about which Discord channel to
    request and what was the ID of the last message seen. Discord made querying
    based on ID very easy, but other chat apps may other ways of getting unread
    messages.
